docs: improve Security Model guide (#4280)
phoenixframework/phoenix_live_view: guides/server/security-model.md

# Security considerations

> LiveView begins its life-cycle as a regular HTTP request. Once the initial HTTP response is sent and then closed, then a second stateful connection is established. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LiveView begins its life-cycle as a regular HTTP request. Afterwards, a second stateful connection is established. 
```

Closing an HTTP response sounds wrong. The connection might be closed, but even then with HTTP keep-alive, the browser might not close it immediately anyway. So focusing on the fact that a second connection is initiated after the initial request should be the main thing here.

> Both the HTTP request and the stateful connection receive the client data via parameters and session. This means that any session validation must happen both in the HTTP request (plug pipeline) and the stateful connection (LiveView mount).

Reviewer: Note that it makes reviewing easier if you try to not change the spacing if the content did not change!

Author: Will keep that in mind for next ones!

## Authentication vs authorization

When speaking about security, there are two terms commonly used:
authentication and authorization. 

> **Authentication** is about identifying a user through credentials. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Authentication** is about verifying the identity of a user. 
```

I'm not sure how most people would interpret "credentials". It could mean anything, which would be correct, but I think many might only think about passwords when reading credentials, so I wouldn't focus on that word.

is automatically validated by Phoenix and tools like `mix phx.gen.auth` can
generate the building blocks of an authentication system for you.

**Authorization** is about telling whether or not an already authenticated user 
*should be allowed access* to a certain resource or feature in the system.

Once a user is authenticated, they may perform any number of actions on a page,
and some of those actions may require specific permissions. 
The specific rules for authorization often change per application.

Overall, we tend to perform authentication and authorization checks 
on every request in a regular web application. 
Given that LiveViews start as a regular HTTP request,
they share the authentication logic with regular requests through plugs.
The request starts in your endpoint, which then invokes the router.
Plugs are used to ensure the user is authenticated and stores the
relevant information in the session.

Once the user is authenticated, we typically suggest to developers 

> to validate sessions on the `mount` callback, or even before at the `on_mount` callback (done before mount).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to validate sessions in the `mount` callback. We explain how to encapsulate this into shared logic in the next section.
```

An instance of such validation would be `Is the user allowed to see this page?` or `Is this user not authorized to use this org?`.

> Also, more specific rules can be verified at `handle_event` callbacks, such as  `Is the user allowed to delete this item?`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, more specific rules can be verified in `handle_event` callbacks, such as  `Is the user allowed to delete this item?`.
```

Also, I'd probably use regular quotes here instead of backticks for the example.

Author: Makes sense!

Any number or format of validations may be built, keep those in mind as a default pattern and an advisal.

> For more info, check `mount/3` and `on_mount/1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## `live_session`

> A second mechanism for validating authorization is grouping LiveViews 

Reviewer: Where is the first mechanism? When reading, I'd expect to have seen a prior sentence the mentioned the word "mechanism", but this is the first one.

```suggestion
The primary mechanism used for validating authorization is grouping LiveViews 
```

Author: That makes sense. In my writing, I believed it was explicit that `on_mount` was one, but certainly by reading now I can tell it isn't.

within a single `live_session`. This is primarily done in the router configuration using
`Phoenix.LiveView.Router.live_session/2`, and by using this primary tactic,

>  LiveView will then ensure that navigation events within the same `live_session` skip the regular initial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
within a single `live_session`. This is done in the router configuration using
`Phoenix.LiveView.Router.live_session/2`. Then, LiveView will ensure that navigation
events within the same `live_session` skip the regular initial
```

      end
    end

> Now, every time you try to navigate to and out of an admin panel,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, every time you try to navigate into and out of an admin panel,
```

> a regular page navigation will happen and a brand new WebSocket connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a regular page navigation will happen and a brand new socket connection
```

There's also longpoll and Phoenix Channels are deliberately transport agnostic.

Author: Sure! I am so accostumed to using WS that I forgot about channels and longpoll.

will be established.

It is worth remembering the previous stated suggestion for authorization:
that LiveViews require their own security checks aside from plugs.
Use `pipe_through` above to protect the regular routes (get, post, etc.)

> and LiveViews should also run their own checks on the `mount` callback

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As previously mentioned, LiveViews require their own security checks,
so we use `pipe_through` above to protect the regular routes (get, post, etc.)
and LiveViews run their own checks in the `mount` callback.
```

(or using `Phoenix.LiveView.on_mount/1` hooks).

You can also combine `live_session` with `on_mount` to provide better control of authorization verification by separating similar LiveViews within a grouped context.

> It stands to reason that that will heavily depend on the application you are developing, and so we leave it to a developer's liking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we group LiveViews into `live_session`s, this is also the perfect place to define shared security checks. Let's look at the available strategies next.
```

      {:ok, socket}
    end

There are a number of possible strategies that we will suggest in this guide for a developer to encapsulate any logic to be executed in every mount.

> 1. Declaring the mount/1 callback repeating the authorization logic, making it visibly being repeated in every LiveView, such as stated above.

Reviewer: I would not mention this, especially not as the first strategy, since it is generally the worst and should only be used if a LiveView needs a different check than others.

Author: I totally understand it is the worst, I only thought of mentioning it first to show how `on_mount` can simplify multiple mount declarations in one. But I see now what you are saying, perhaps just naming the most appropriate would fit.

      end
    end

An `on_mount` module can be called in three ways:

> 1. In every LiveView.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In each LiveView it should apply to.
```

    defmodule MyAppWeb.TestLive do
      @moduledoc false
      use Phoenix.LiveView

      on_mount MyAppWeb.AdminLiveAuth
    end

2. Called in the `live_view` macro generated by your Phoenix project 
(usually in the `your_project.ex` file.)

    def live_view do
      quote do
        use Phoenix.LiveView

        on_mount MyAppWeb.AdminLiveAuth
      end
    end

    defmodule MyAppWeb.TestLive do
      @moduledoc false
      use MyAppWeb, :live_view
    end

> 3. Instead of a declared `on_mount` on every LiveView, you can declare it at the router level and it will enforce it on all LiveViews under it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. At the `live_session` level, so it applies to all LiveViews in the group.
```

I would probably name this as the first option.

Author: I have to say that it bothers me that, inside a live_session, the status of a revoked user is not reverified, even if it meant going to a cache. 

It could mean a vulnerability whether an attacker knows this is the pattern of the application, that he shouldn't change to a liveview outside a live session, and therefore he continues to navigate not having the necessary authorization to do so though.

I can discuss further with an example, but this has crossed my mind more than once. What do you think about it?

Reviewer: I don't understand what you're trying to say. `on_mount` in a `live_session` works the exact same way as `on_mount` in a LiveView or defining that same code in every LiveView's `mount` callback. Whether you check for a revoked status or not is fully in your control.

Author: Before replying, I just re-read the documentation to confirm my knowledge, and I misunderstood the way `live_session` worked, I'm sorry :D. For some reason I can't recollect now, I originally thought that the on_mount/1 was not going to be performed even if a `live_navigate/1` was going to be called, and therefore I was worried about it.

I see now how it is fully in our control, indeed, so I will apply the suggestion! thanks for your patience :)

Author: By the way, in another note but regarding the same topic: 

Is it right to assume that `live_session` 's use excels when different groups of live_views expect different `on_mount/`s? 
But, really, I understand the difference is that a new HTTP request will be made, NECESSARILY. What would the benefit of requiring the user to make the HTTP request again, if the live navigation already verifies, for example, the `user_token` in the `session` params in the `on_mount`, same as the HTTP request does?

Is there any case where the HTTP auth verification would do different things from the connected verification?

Reviewer: It is meant for cases where there are different checks, yes. One example that is already mentioned right now is if you have an admin section that does authentication at the HTTP level (e.g. Plug.BasicAuth). In that case, the authentication on the http request is enough and you wouldn't need another check on the LiveView side. The different live_sessions ensure that there can be no navigation between the groups that don't go through the full plug pipeline.

Author: Okay, that makes a lot of sense! Of course, I believe there is also the cost of opening a socket connection that could be a bit bit more cost than plain HTTP, right? Overall, thank you, it was very elucidating.

    scope "/" do
      pipe_through [:authenticate_user]

      live_session :default, on_mount: MyAppWeb.UserLiveAuth do
        live ...
      end
    end

    scope "/admin" do
      pipe_through [:authenticate_admin]

      live_session :admin, on_mount: MyAppWeb.AdminLiveAuth do
        live ...
      end
    end

Each live route under the `:default` `live_session` will invoke
the `MyAppWeb.UserLiveAuth` hook on mount. We will also pipe regular web requests through `:authenticate_user`, which must execute the same checks as `MyAppWeb.UserLiveAuth`.

Similarly, the `:admin` `live_session` has its own authentication
flow, powered by `MyAppWeb.AdminLiveAuth`. It also defines a plug
equivalent named `:authenticate_admin`, which will be used by any
regular request. 

Declaring the `on_mount` on `live_session` is exactly the same as
declaring it in each LiveView. Let's talk about which logic we typically

> execute on mount.

Reviewer: The last sentence seems misplaced.

```suggestion
declaring it in each LiveView. But it is the preferred way most of the time,
since it prevents you from accidentally forgetting to include it.
```

Maybe something like that?
